docs: add tutorial (#159)
canonical/charmlibs: .docs/tutorial.md

**What you'll need:**

- Your development machine.
- An internet connection.

**What you'll do:**

- Use the `charmlibs` repository tooling to add a new library from the template.
- Get familiar with the repository tooling that will test and release your library.
- Document your library and get approval to add your library to the monorepo.

In this tutorial we'll make a library for retrieving system uptime, but feel free to follow these instructions with your own library.

```{note}
Should you get stuck at any point: Don't hesitate to get in touch on [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#charmhub-charmdev:ubuntu.com) or [Discourse](https://discourse.charmhub.io/).
```

## Set up your machine

We'll need [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) for all our developer commands.
If you don't already have it installed, follow the [uv installation instructions](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv?tab=readme-ov-file#installation), or install the `snap`:
```bash
sudo snap install --classic astral-uv
```

This repository uses [just](https://github.com/casey/just) as a command runner. With `uv` installed, we can install `just` with:
```bash
uv tool install rust-just
```

> If you're not already using some alternative authentication for `git push`, you'll also want to [make sure you've set up your Github account with your SSH key](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account).

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to run the Juju integration tests locally, you'll also need `charmcraft`installed for packing, as well as a Juju controller for your local K8s or machine clouds.
In CI, these are installed and set up for you using [concierge](https://github.com/canonical/concierge?tab=readme-ov-file#presets), with the `microk8s` and `machine` presets.
The `dev` preset is suitable for local development and testing of both K8s and machine charms.

> See more:
> - {ref}`Charmcraft | Install charmcraft <charmcraft:manage-charmcraft>`
> - {ref}`Juju | Set up your Juju deployment <juju:set-up-your-deployment>`
> - {ref}`Juju | Set up an isolated environment <juju:set-things-up>`

If you're not already using some alternative authentication for `git push`, you'll also want to [make sure you've set up your Github account with your SSH key](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account).
```

There's also a directory named `library/`, which contains symlinks to your library code and metadata -- this is how the latest changes from your library are made available to these charms.
Under `src/`, you'll see a unique `charm.py` file, and a symlink to `common.py`.

Our `uptime` function should work just as well in a K8s charm as in a machine charm, so we'll test on both substrates, meaning that we don't need to change anything so far.

For testing purposes, we'll communicate with the library in our packed charm via a Juju action.
Open `tests/integration/charms/actions.yaml` and add a new action:
```yaml
charm-uptime:
```

We'll also need an observer for this action, which can be the same for both charms, so it can go in the `Charm` base class in `common.py`.
It will look a lot like the handler for `lib-version`, `_on_lib_version`, but we'll serialize the result as a JSON object to preserve its type for our test code.
Open `tests/integraton/charms/common.py` and add this import statement:
```python
import json
```

> Then add an observer for our new action to the `Charm` class body:

Reviewer: We also need to add `framework.observe(self.on['charm-uptime'].action, self._on_charm_uptime)` in `__init__`.

Author: Good catch, adding below.

```python
def _on_charm_uptime(self, event: ops.ActionEvent):
    logger.info('action [charm-uptime] called with params: %s', event.params)
    results = {'uptime': json.dumps(uptime.uptime().total_seconds())}
    event.set_results(results)
    logger.info('action [charm-uptime] set_results: %s', results)
```

Finally, we'll need a test to exercise this code. Copy `tests/integration/test_version.py`, to `tests/integration/test_uptime.py`, and add this import to `test_uptime.py`:
```python
import json
```

> Then replace the `test_version` function with this:

Reviewer: I needed to remove `from charmlibs import uptime` from `test_uptime.py`, otherwise linting failed due to the unused import.

```python
def test_charm_uptime(juju: jubilant.Juju, charm: str):
    result = juju.run(f'{charm}/0', 'charm-uptime')
    uptime_seconds = json.loads(result.results['uptime'])
    assert uptime_seconds > 0.0

> ```

Author: ````suggestion
```
You'll also want to remove the `from charmlibs import uptime` line since it's now unused, and linting will complain about the unused import.
````

> You can test this locally by running `just pack-k8s uptime` and `just pack-machine uptime` to pack your K8s and machine charms, and then running `just integration-k8s uptime` and `just integration-machine uptime` to deploy the charms on your local Juju K8s and machine clouds and test them.

Reviewer: I didn't think of this the first time, but is it obvious that you'll need Charmcraft installed? I don't think it's worth mentioning here, but perhaps in the setup section at the beginning? As an optional step. Maybe even expanded to say that if you want to run integration tests locally, you'll need Charmcraft and local Juju K8s and machine clouds.

Just an idle thought - I'm fine if you want to leave this out.

Author: ```suggestion
You can test this locally by running `just pack-k8s uptime` and `just pack-machine uptime` to pack your K8s and machine charms, and then running `just integration-k8s uptime` and `just integration-machine uptime` to deploy the charms on your local Juju K8s and machine clouds and test them.
Note that this will require `charmcraft` installed locally for packing, and a Juju controller available for the K8s or machine clouds.
```

The author and minimum Python version information are easy to change in the generated `pyproject.toml` later, but if you change your library name you'll need to change it in a few other locations too, like the directory names (`uptime/src/charmlibs/uptime`) and the imports in your tests and test charms.

This will create a new directory for your library named accordingly.
The library itself just sets `__version__` to `0.0.0.dev0`, and the tests just check the version.

## Verifying the basics

Let's verify that your library has been scaffolded correctly.
Start by running `just lint uptime` from anywhere in the repository.
(`just` commands execute from the `justfile` directory, regardless of where they're run.)
This will run `ruff`, `codespell`, and `pyright` on your library, all of which should pass.
This will also create a `uv.lock` file in your library's directory, which should be included in version control.

Then run `just unit uptime` to verify that your unit tests pass, and `just functional uptime` to check the functional tests.
We'll talk more about Juju integration tests later.

You can also verify that everything looks right in an interactive session.

> Run `uvx --with=./uptime ipython --pdb` in the repository root to start an interactive Python shell with your library installed, and then import your library with:

Author: I'm wondering if a `just shell uptime` command like [this](https://github.com/canonical/charmlibs/pull/171/files) would be worthwhile.

    - It defaults to running once with `ubuntu@latest`.
    - If this is important for your library, consider using virtual machines to test against multiple bases locally.
- `pebble` is a list of [Pebble version tags](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/tags), for example `["v1.24.0"]`.
    - If specified, the Pebble version will be an additional row in the matrix your functional tests are run with, with the corresponding Pebble version installed.
    - By default, your tests are run once without Pebble installed.
    - For local testing, you'll need to install the version of Pebble that you want to test against yourself. You can then run `just functional-pebble <YOUR LIBRARY DIRECTORY>` instead of `just functional <YOUR LIBRARY DIRECTORY>` to have Pebble started and stopped before and after your tests.
- `sudo` is a `true` or `false` option, defaulting to `false`.
    - If it's `true`, your tests are run in CI with `sudo` permissions in their ephemeral runner.
    - If your tests require `sudo` privileges, you'll need to manage that locally yourself, for example by testing in a virtual machine.

> If your library needs another piece of software like `pebble` installed for its functional tests, get in touch with us on [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#charmhub-charmdev:ubuntu.com) or open an issue about the option to install it in CI.

Reviewer: I was a bit confused by this, as Pebble is already covered above. I think this would be fine:

```suggestion
If your library needs a specific piece of software for CI to run its functional tests, get in touch with us on [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/#charmhub-charmdev:ubuntu.com) or open an issue in the `charmlibs` repository.
```

Author: I made this change in #172, I'll update the tutorial accordingly.

> In our case, we don't need any extra software, we don't need `sudo`, and we don't expect any differences across Ubuntu versions, so we can just keep the default configuration.

Reviewer: A couple of minor suggestions. Since we diverted away from talking about `uptime`, I think it would be good to mention it again

```suggestion
For our `uptime` library, we don't need any extra software, we don't need `sudo`, and we don't expect any differences across Ubuntu versions, so we can keep the default configuration.
```

After setting up the test environment with `concierge`, if your library has a `tests/integration/pack.sh` script, it will be executed. The template provides a script that packs a different minimal charm depending on the substrate, using symlinks to share common code and metadata, and resolving these before packing. You can modify this script to pack one or more charms to be deployed in your integration tests. Both `CHARMLIBS_SUBSTRATE` and `CHARMLIBS_TAG` are set when running `pack.sh`, which you can use to change what gets packed.

Let's add an integration test for our `uptime` function.

We'll start by taking a look at the files that will make up our packed charm, under `tests/integration/charms`.
At the top level are directories for two test charms, with the directory name reflecting the substrate the charm is for: `k8s` and `machine`.
You'll also see some common files which are symlinked into the structure for our two test charms -- these symlinks are resolved by `pack.sh` before `charmcraft pack` is executed.
Taking a look inside one of the charm directories, you can see these symlinks, as well as a unique `charmcraft.yaml` file, and the usual `src/` directory.

> There's also a directory named `package/`, which contains symlinks to your library code and metadata -- this is how your library is made available to the charms.

Reviewer: I can't see a directory named `package` - maybe I'm looking in the wrong place

Under `src/`, you'll see a unique `charm.py` file, and a symlink to `common.py`.

This structure reflects the logic of `tests/integration/pack.sh`, which finds a directory under charms named `$CHARMLIBS_SUBSTRATE`, copies it to a temporary location for packing, resolving any symlinks, and packs the charm.
You're free to customise this script as you need to, but hopefully it's a good starting point.

Our `uptime` function should work just as well in a K8s charm as in a machine charm, so we'll test on both substrates, and we won't mark any of our tests as `k8s_only` or `machine_only`.

We'll communicate with the library in our packed charm via a Juju action.
Open `tests/integration/charms/actions.yaml` and add a new action:
```yaml
charm-uptime:
```

We'll also need an observer for this action, which can be the same for both charms.

> It will look a lot like the handler for `lib-version`, `_on_lib_version`, but we'll serialize the fancy version information as a JSON object so it can be passed over the wire to our test code.

Reviewer: This part still mentions the fancy version from an earlier revision of the tutorial
